---
title: "Projects: Technology & Innovation"
date: 2026-02-16
categories: [Project, Description, Problem Statement, tools Used, key Outcome ]
tags: [Smart Monitoring, Technology & Innovation]
image: /assets/Innovation-and-Technology.jpg

---

## Smart Brooder Controller System 

## Abstract
The rise in mortality rates in brooding especially poultry farmers is a concern that requires attention. This is primarily as a result of the method being deployed by farmers in their farms as they nature and raise the chicks. The use and reliance in traditional means of monitoring have proven to be inconsistent, labor intensive and costly which has in most cases left farmers with disappointment.
However, with the smart brooder temperature controller to curb the temperature within the required range in relation to the age of the chicks; It’s a game changer in the poultry farming sector as it eliminates the need for manual temperature adjustments. This is by use of modern technology to automate the process of ensuring the temperature is in the correct range depending on the age of the chicks in the brooder. With this system in place the farmer will be able to monitor the temperature in real time as it includes a friendly user display to show the temperature at that particular moment. 

## Introduction
**1.1	Background information**
Poultry farming is vital source of income and nutrition for rural household in Kenya. However chick mortality rates remain high, especially in the first 4-6 weeks of life. A major cause is poor temperature regulation in brooders. As raising chicks in controlled conditions during their early life is critical for survival and growth.
Traditional brooders rely on manual monitoring of temperature, humidity, and lighting, which is labor-intensive and prone to errors. Smart agricultural technologies are increasingly being adopted to improve efficiency, reduce costs, and enhance productivity.
As chicks grow, their temperature requirements change. However, most farmers lack the necessities to adjust conditions accurately.

**1.2	Problem statement**
Farmers often struggle to maintain optimal brooding condition. Hence, they rely on kerosene lamps, charcoal or manual monitoring, which are inconsistent, labor –intensive and costly. Use and reliance to this traditional ways may sometimes lead to much bigger losses as most farmers use wood ash in there chick housing and in the case of a farmer using charcoal this may be a cause of fire occurrence.
Lack of affordable, automated solutions tailored for small- and medium-scale poultry farmer is also a key driver for this project. 

**1.3	Proposed solution**
Develop a Smart Brooder Controller that uses sensors and microcontrollers to automatically regulate temperature and humidity.
This proposed solution is intended to help farmers maximize their profit by reducing the mortality not just to help farmers but also contributing to national food security and nutrition goals. In addition the farmers would be able to meet the market demand. 
This is to be made possible by the proposed brooder temperature controller with:
	Real-time monitoring via display.
	Alerts for abnormal conditions.
	Energy-efficient design to reduce operational costs.
